A few couple of days, so you'll have to forgive me if I sound a little naive in some of my questions.
Okay.
Are you, by the way, can I ask you a question?
Please go ahead.
Are you an education reporter?
Have you done this beat at all before?
Education?
No.
I've been writing about books for about 20 years.
You're a book guy.
I see.
And I just have written my own book, as a matter of fact, which did pretty well.
On what subject?
It was on books, on the passion for books.
It was called A Gentle Madness.
It was shortlisted for the National Book Critics Circle Award this year, I'm pleased to see.
Oh, good.
And just got into its fifth printing, and it's about 50,000 copies in print.
Fantastic.
Well, I hope we'll notice that one.
And let me also say I'm working on a new book, which is why when Marley suggested that we talk, I am writing a new book about book culture, books...
There will be a chapter on literacy and books of the future, where we're going. I'm talking I'm really I am really quite interested in learning more about the things you write about so so there is a subtext here. I'm not only interested in writing a piece for
for this weekly column that I write, which is syndicated, by the way, in about 25 newspapers, largely in university cities.
I'm in, you know, Eugene, Oregon and Charlottesville.
I'm in Charlottesville, as a matter of fact.
Oh, really?
Good.
I'm in every week in the Daily Progress.
What day?
Sunday, I guess.
I do the weekly book column in the Daily Progress.
Oh, good.
So I'm in Knoxville, Gainesville, a couple of papers here in New England, two in Massachusetts.
People who read books.
That's the whole idea.
I've syndicated it myself and I've gone after
cities where I know people read books, buy books, and where the newspapers also don't have a regular book guy, you know?
That makes sense.
So that's what I do.
And I just got your book, you'll have to forgive me, yesterday.
It's kind of a fast, but I mean, I certainly know the themes here.
Tell me a little bit about, is this a clarion call, let's say, that you're issuing with this book?
Let's enter the conversation.
Why don't I let you start?
I'd rather have it a clarion call to do something than just be thought of like a complaint.
That's why I gave it a positive title rather than... That's what the negative one in the... Well, it could be the schools we don't have.
Is that right?
Yeah.
I mean, it could have been that, couldn't it?
The schools we don't have, that's right.
But as you say, you want to be very optimistic about it.
Yes, and suggest that both how we got schools that don't work and
what we need to do to have schools that work.
Well, what happened?
We certainly had schools that worked, didn't we?
Well, there's a dispute about that by the defenders of the academic establishment, which the party line there is that there never was a golden age of American education.
And when people give examples of how in earlier times they and their
colleagues were better educated the answer is well in those days you were educating just a smaller percentage of the American citizens and now we're educating all groups and it's a much more diverse country and so on I don't believe that line myself but in any case I
If you say we used to be a lot better, which I believe can be documented.
By the way, it's documented in, let me give just one example.
In 1980, there was a new science
the International Study of Science Achievement by elementary school children.
And in 1970, the U.S.
ranked seventh among 17 countries.
And in 1980, it ranked 16th among 17 countries, so something like that.
There is evidence that by the same kind of measure, done the same way, that the U.S.
has fallen, certainly in relative terms.
Of course, it could be argued that the others have gotten better, too, I suppose.
Yes, that's right.
That's why I say in relative terms.
That's the only thing we know.
Though one could, of course, if one calibrated the test, which it probably could be done, which I haven't done, you could find out how we did in relation to our own fire performance.
To ourselves.
And then we do look out and we see how college board tests in particular have been dumbed down.
The famous SAT drop in the 60s, and that's a fact that
has been avoided and apologized for ever since the 1970s.
And the fact that, you know, people were getting 300s and said, well, let's just make the test score different.
So make people feel good about themselves.
And you certainly have very strong opinions on that, don't you?
This whole concept of making students feel good about themselves.
Well, I wouldn't say I had
I didn't start out with a sort of ideological bias or strong opinions about the nature of life.
I have a much more scholarly or research orientation to the subject, and the evidence is that the self-esteem movement doesn't work.
There's a great deal of evidence now that's piled up.
In fact, it seems to have a rather negative effect to make students feel too good about themselves without any foundation, and also it has a
paradoxical effect, enhancing students' self-esteem without student achievement actually begins making students feel worse about them.
Do you, in fact, think of this phrase, dumbing down, which has come into prominence recently, do you see a trend?
Do you, in fact, see some of this dumbing down going on?
Yes, I do.
points besides the test scores.
One is that the dumbing down, which in my opinion is an emphasis on things other than subject matter in the schools, has been going on since the progressivists of the 1920s have grown in influence.
That's by far the dominant influence in education schools and among teachers now.
All the ones who believe differently have long retired.
And so there is a tendency to trivialize knowledge, to say that it's nothing but trivial suits, that it's useless, it's here today, it's gone tomorrow, facts are changing so often that they're not important.
And that anti-knowledge movement, which characterized aggressive movement in education,
has taken home.
And that dumbed down the schools considerably.
But that's the source of it, according to it.
The book essentially has a double focus.
One is historical, and the other is scientific and research-oriented.
It is interesting and encouraging, I would think.
that this sequence of books that you've written has found a popular audience.
You mean what your first reader and so on?
Yeah.
I mean, but these books have not been relegated, and I have the greatest respect for university presses, of course, but you certainly have found a responsive readership out there, haven't you?
And the interesting thing is it's not just white middle class parents, but minority parents who are like these books and like the core knowledge schools where the core knowledge sequence is used.
I think that the success of those schools lends a certain authority to what this book argues, which, by the way, is anyway based on
pretty uncontrovertible.
I mean, you certainly have given it a positive title, and it's very hopeful, but realistically, where do you see, I mean, do we need a seismic turn of a... Yes, you do, but it's a seismic turn not in willingness and energy to do things, which is there in the country, I think.
But...
a seismic change in ideas so that people can't get away with saying rote memorization, you know, just voicing.
I would say the chief aim of this book is to inoculate the general public against the slogans that have been so successful and so successful as rhetoric and unsuccessful as rhetoric.
policy.
What are the principal obstacles in your view?
Intellectual ones.
That is resistance.
By home, I mean, if you can be specific.
By the people in power.
That is the people, the superintendents, the departments of education, the program officers of foundations.
There's what I call in the book a thought world.
That's quite monolithic and which brooks no opposition.
If you oppose it, you're morally culpable.
For example, who would want to stand up among a group of educationists and say, I'm for, quote, rote memorization?
Nobody would.
And yet, nothing can be learned without being remembered.
Yeah, I mean, every time I try out a new word processor or a computer, I always do the Gettysburg Address, you know, something I learned 40 years ago or whatever, you know.
They don't do that.
There's a great deal to be said for learning things by heart, of course, and there's a great deal to be said for all kinds of things that are disparaged.
And that's what has to be turned around, in my opinion, more than anything else.
Do you have a position in this whole debate, which I've certainly just recently become aware of, and in fact which I'm pursuing, and I'm just at the beginning of it from my own new book, this whole idea of the canon, you know, the literary...
Well, I do have lots of ideas about cannons, and my sense is that a cannon is something that does get changed, but it doesn't get changed with great speed.
Because and you don't want it to get changed.
There are two kinds of canon I think you're talking about.
One is the great books canon, which is more of a literary canon, so to speak.
But there is another kind of canon, which is a canon of knowledge that a community or a society shares.
And that's a canon, the literary canon,
which may have always belonged, except for the Bible and Shakespeare, to just an elite.
I mean, is Edith Wharton part of the canon?
Who knows the works of Edith Wharton?
Only a tiny elite.
But I'll come back to Edith Wharton in a second, because there is a whole school of women's studies now, which is trying to develop its own canon of who belongs and who deserves entry.
But that canon, in my mind, while it's important, is far less important than the canon of knowledge, because the canon of knowledge and vocabulary, as it were,
enables strangers to communicate with one another.
And that's what the schools have a responsibility to give everybody.
Of course, that's what cultural literacy was all about.
That's, of course, what it was about.
In that book, I say there were two failures in American education, two guiding ideas that were wrong.
One was formalism, and the other naturalism.
Cultural literacy was attacking formalism, the emptying of content from education.
And this book is attacking naturalism, which suggests that if you just grow naturally, you will automatically get educated.
And if you do anything unnatural in school, it's bad.
Well, that is as big a barrier to effective education as content.
neutrality was.
You know, I see.
I'm an English major at a factory.
Where are you in Maine, incidentally?
It's called Christmas Cove.
Uh-huh.
I went to Bates up in Lewiston, which is a good little school.
And we had these courses.
I went in the 60s, early 60s, called Cultural Heritage, you know, for three years.
And, of course, I was an English major, and therefore I took a full year of Shakespeare, the greatest course I've ever taken.
And now I read, just last year or the year before, that you can actually get a degree in English literature from Georgetown and not be required to study Shakespeare.
Amazing to me.
I hope there will be a reaction against it, and I'm going in just a few days to a group of
literary scholars.
Are you going to this conference in Boston?
I'm a member of that society as well.
I'm a charter member actually myself.
I joined when they put that ad in the New York Review.
I'm wondering if this might be a fruitful thing for me to attend.
If only just to see how these... I haven't attended any yet.
This is going to be my first one.
I think this is only the second one.
Yeah, that's right.
Last year was in Minneapolis.
Right.
So you're coming down to that.
Yeah, I'm planning to.
I might just call today, and I think I could probably still register.
Swiss Hotel.
I'm sure you can.
I don't think most academics can afford to.
Well, it's close to me.
It's only 55 bucks to register.
Whatever, yeah.
And for me, it's a 45-minute drive.
Oh, where are you?
I'm out near Worcester.
Oh, yeah, sure.
That would be worth doing.
In Grafton.
This is my base.
I'm sorry, where were I?
So now what do you expect to do?
Speaking of this conference, what do you expect to glean from this?
Nothing.
I just want to see old friends and get back into the academic swing a little bit.
I've been involved in school reform so long.
What's your sense?
I'm not asking you to comment on this organization, but it does seem to be a reaction to things.
That's right.
Yes.
And the idea that there are
Some works are in the canon because they're better than others.
That's one of the ideas that is behind this.
But, I mean, now there's a book I just received.
In fact, yesterday came in the same mail as yours, and it's about a... I'm trying to find it.
You're only getting my book to you right now?
I just got it yesterday.
Isn't that awful?
Yeah, that's why, I mean, if it's... I think Doubleday is the word... If it sounds like I'm... Like I said, please forgive me for sounding... The publicity office, I mean, they're really pretty...
I mean, you have to forgive.
In fact, today is my deadline for getting my column out.
So I've been focused on getting this week's piece out.
So I really haven't had the time, you know, that I need to commit myself to your book here.
And that's why if it sounds like these questions are vague and naive, it's because, you know, I just really got the package yesterday.
So I assure you it'll be thoroughly written and I... Isn't that interesting?
When did they say they were going to send it to you?
Well, I also have to, in their defense, I talked to Marley Rousseff just last week and she told me this, I pursued this, not the other way around.
And so she thought it would be a very good idea and so we just...
I mean, we just put this thing together, like, within the last four or five days.
Whatever they called you was probably 45 minutes after they talked to me.
And they probably just talked to you a couple days ago already.
So it is just kind of, I see it as a perfect piece to run the first week of September.
Yeah, sure.
And I was looking for something.
I'm making a West Coast trip that week, and I'm very happy to get something out.
I'm curious.
I wonder, is there a number in Virginia where I can reach you?
Yeah, sure.
You can call me again.
We don't need to extend this because it might be better.
to assimilate.
I mean, I've given you a few things about my main, well, I don't know whether I've mentioned my main motivation.
And I think we should do that.
Writing this book was the really intellectual change, change ideas, change people's minds.
It's got to be a long-range thing.
I don't see any significant improvement coming without
real debate and change of ideas, and including change among the education people themselves.
If that isn't encouraged, I don't know how it's going to happen.
And I am encouraged to think that it could happen, because we have now more than 300 core knowledge schools in 40 states.
And you've been quite directly involved in this, haven't you?
Sure.
I mean, this is your baby, actually.
That core knowledge movement, yeah.
from my foundation.
And what do you see from that?
I mean, is it, you said how many, 300?
Well, I think it means that the teachers are quite pragmatic just the way I am.
And their indoctrination does not run deep.
They want to do what works.
Whereas education professors tend to have their egos and their home.
self-identity mixed up with this system of ideas that is wrong.
And my hope is that eventually there'll be some dissent in those ranks as well.
How about with these groups that you work with, what do you see happening with reading skills for children?
Well, they've declined and partly it's going to
lower vocabulary, which has declined because of less knowledge.
I mean, knowledge and vocabulary are correlative.
And the other reason was the whole language movement, which has been discredited now.
And just to go back briefly, we're talking about this group in Boston, the AC.
We did agree that this was established more or less as a reaction to... A counter-MLA, I think.
And do you have a position on this, on the MLA and...
Well, I thought I'd agree with Christopher Ricks.
He was one of the founding fathers of this group.
And he said the problem with the MLA isn't that it's political.
The problem is that it doesn't commit anything except the political.
And he expressed it better than that.
But I think it's right.
But that's basically what the attitude is.
Yeah.
Could you give me a number where I can reach you?
In Charlottesville or wherever?
Probably the best place is home, and it's 804-296-2631.
Okay.
I will be coming down to Charlottesville, and I can't say precisely when, but to work on this new book.
I want to see Terry Ballinger over at the university, and...
Perhaps if you're around me, we can get together.
Oh, sure.
I would look forward to it.
And I'll give you an idea precisely.
I'll have a better idea of where I'm going.
And maybe if I do, in fact, go to that conference this weekend, I'll try and... One quick question.
How do people dress?
How do academics dress for summer conferences?
I don't know.
I'm bringing a thing.
I never went to such a thing, and I'm bringing both casual and non-casual things.
I'm going to look around and see.
I'd feel like a fool going to dress in a suit.
But I think it would be well to bring a coat and tie because God only knows as they're claiming to be.
But they might then dress very casually to prove that they're not all that conservative.
I have no idea.
I figured you'd know.
I know some of them being coats and ties because some of my colleagues are that way.
But not necessarily the group.
Well, I think I'm going to call them right now and maybe register and show up because I think I'd really be angry with my... I'm going to shut this tape.
It's rolling.
Good.
So let's talk a little bit.
Okay.
First of all, I want to tell you what probably you already know that the TV crew is coming from Holland.
Uh-huh.
You know that.
I know that, and he sent me a fax yesterday, and he asked me to try and come up with somebody else for him, and I think I have somebody who will be terrific for him.
A woman from Switzerland by the name of Christina Johnson, who married into the Johnson & Johnson family and put together this unbelievable collection of whaling, which is going to be sold at Swan Gallery, so I'm going to send a fax off to him about that.
So apparently he said he's coming in October.
Now, who is the one whom he drops?
Well, he didn't drop, but Mrs. Taper, Louise Taper.
I guess she decided she doesn't want to do it.
That's the Lincoln lady?
Yeah.
He didn't say why, but I know Louise is kind of fickle, shall we say, and I'm sure for reasons of her own she's decided against it.
But, you know, the only person she's ever talked to is me.
So it doesn't surprise me that she decided against it.
But I think this other woman will be better, actually.
I mean, if it's possible for anybody to be wealthier than Mrs. Taper, I think this woman is, and she certainly has indulged her passion.
And there are a lot of European resonances to her collection, too.
You know that the big boss in Chicago used to throw human clothes his nose.
Oh, I didn't know.
And I think
If somebody wants to... You know, I'm taking them to Ralph Newman's home to see his private collection.
Uh-huh.
Slash for sale.
Really?
Yeah, because... Did you start the program you made with me?
Uh-huh.
Did you start the program?
I didn't, no.
I'm sorry.
Uh-huh.
Okay, I will send you a copy.
Okay.
Now, he's closed down, huh?
How old is he now, Lou?
He must be in his 90s, huh?
No, he's mid-80s.
I should probably talk to him, don't you think?
If I would be you, I definitely would.
Is he in good health?
Let me check out the situation.
I'd like to talk to him.
I bet you he'd have a lot of interesting stories for me.
Absolutely.
He has a customer, a good, very wealthy customer, who buys only 11 or 12th edition of books.
I'm sorry.
Because he is a nut.
And he tells to a new one, Ralph, every goddamn shitty book has a first edition.
Ralph has a first edition.
What if a book is 12th edition?
That must be something.
That's funny.
Can you know he's right on Monday?
I wonder, it's hard for me to say when I could get out to Chicago.
I certainly know I'm coming out for... I'm sure you will be here.
Well, I'll be out there at the ABA, I know, for next year, but I'd like to do it before that, too.
Sure.
Now, the other thing is what I want to talk to you about.
True friends.
of friends, I made acquaintance with a man whose name is Dr. Mayer Maynor.
M-A-Y-E-R.
M-A-Y-N-O-R.
Okay.
Meyer.
M-A-Y-E-R.
Okay.
He is junior.
He is the president of Illinois Wesleyan University.
Mm-hmm.
And he's a fabulous book collector.
But kind of a, you know, he is not a public book collector.
He's a very private person.
And he's a book collector with tremendous knowledge.
I would like you and him to meet here.
next time when you are here.
And I would like to, you know, he gets your book from me so he knows about you as I talk about you a lot.
I've got a question for you.
How far is Chicago from Detroit?
By plane, 30 minutes.
Well, I've got to come out to Detroit in November.
Maybe I could come to Chicago a day earlier.
Absolutely.
And then just shoot up to Detroit and come back home from Detroit.
Sure.
You know?
And these, you know, maybe I could, that's the way to do it, don't you think?
I think so.
And maybe I could do Ralph Newman on that same trip.
And you know what?
You can sleep here one night with us.
Oh, I wouldn't want to impose on you like that.
Well, I'm not talking about imposing.
I'm talking about, I don't know about you, but my time is money.
And if I can sit and talk during the time that you spend on a taxi going to a hotel,
You know what I mean?
Yeah, good.
Then there is no imposement to send a delivery to life.
Well, let's take a look at it.
Right now, I got five talks set up in October.
I'm doing the Library of Congress, the Rofont Club.
I'm doing the Library Company of Philadelphia.
Then, in November, this is November now, I'm going to, I'm doing,
the Friends of the Detroit Public Library on November the 21st.
Now, I could come out, say, for... I could come out, like, maybe early in the morning of the 20th, either stay the night of the 20th, fly to Chicago on the morning of the 21st.
I'm sorry, what?
Shariu, pick up the phone for a minute while you and I are talking about this particular thing.
Okay.
Oh, she cannot pick up the phone.
Shariu, you just write down this.
November 20th, early morning.
Beth Bain perhaps arrives.
Let's say the earliest flight up there.
And we have flights that start at 8 o'clock, so I could be there at 9 o'clock in the morning, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
And we will try to stay together with Minor, Dr. Minor.
Minor?
And I would stay that one night?
Yeah.
And then I would get the earliest plane out the next day to Detroit?
Is that a good idea?
Very good idea.
In July, this is now August, September.
It's three months, but that gives us plenty of time to set this up.
November 20th.
That's a Wednesday, November 20th.
Wednesday, yeah.
Um you know Ralph Newman right after my book came out he wrote me a letter, a fan letter. Yeah. He loved it and he said gee he'd love to talk to me so he knows about my book and he wants to talk to me. I talked to him two three times about your book. So uh you know maybe if I could get a two-hour session with him. Yeah. And then maybe a two-hour session with this other gentleman.
Yeah.
And then maybe it's come some time with you.
This is the way I like it, you know?
Okay.
Now, another thing.
I need you as a friend.
You are my friend.
I am?
Yes.
You know, a friend is need.
Is a friend indeed.
There you go.
I would like you to review the shrub box.
Could you do that for me?
The Katarina Schroft book?
Yeah.
I haven't seen it yet, you know.
You sent me a copy.
You did send me that?
You thanked for it.
Okay, okay, I did, okay.
I thought this is not something that just came out now.
It just came out.
Okay, then I have it.
But, you know, if you cannot locate it, I said... No, no, no, no, no.
My wife takes care of all that stuff, so if I thank you for it, we have it.
For sure.
Well, you mentioned when you've been here in Chicago.
I did.
Okay.
Let me take a look.
It just came out, right?
I'm sure we have it.
You said you thanked for it.
If I thanked you for it, I've got it.
Yeah.
Okay.
We have...
I have difficulties with the publisher.
And the book was not reviewed anywhere yet.
And I produced some interesting reviews.
You know?
We're off the beaten path.
Like Stanley Marks reviewed it in his column in the Dallas newspaper.
And the former diplomat, the Hungarian, who writes for the biggest Hungarian weekly in the United States, wrote a good review about what nobody book you.
Well, the only problem is who would I review it for?
Don't you have some kind of a column?
I have a column, but it's not a, you know, again, it's not a review kind of a thing.
Let me look at the book and see what I can do.
I'm sure I can do something.
What does your column do?
My column is more of a, you know, it's a mainstream literary feature where I do people like Mario Puzo and Doris Lessing and, you know, the new big books that are out.
at a particular time for, you know, George Higgins or Toni Morrison, you know, and it's usually a feature on the individual and the book.
But again, you know, let me see what I can do.
Could you do a feature on me?
I'm just fearful that people are going to know what I'm doing.
I'm just fearful that people are going to know that I'm writing about somebody that I've written about in my book.
That's all.
But let me look at it.
Let me see what I can do.
Let me explore this, okay?
Sure.
Let me explore it.
Yeah.
Maybe, because I've written about you already.
You know, we should do this book for the Biblio magazine, too, you know?
Uh-huh.
Don't you think so?
Could you do it for the Biblio?
Yeah, now that I could definitely do.
That would be fabulous for me.
Would that be good?
Oh, sure.
Because I write a regular column for them now.
Yes.
And she does, she takes what I tell her to take, you know?
Yeah.
And, you know, I can give you a very interesting angle.
Okay.
You know what I mean?
Sure.
I give you a very interesting angle.
Let's do it that way, okay?
Okay.
That would be better for me.
And it would be good for me, too, because, you know, it would be difficult to change, you know, all of a sudden do something different from what I do.
Yeah.
You know?
So, but I'd be happy to do it for Biblio.
Sure.
I'll call them, in fact, immediately.
It may be too late to get it into the third issue, but we'll see.
No, put it in the fourth issue.
Well, then that's great.
That'll give me plenty of time.
Because you tell them that I just started the article by Louis.
I know he's a member of the advisory.
I don't even have to go that far with him, Louis.
They'll do it if I tell them to do it.
Yeah.
If I offer to give them a story, they'll take it.
They'll take anything I write.
And you know, the book has an author up front, not me.
The what?
I am just co-author.
Yeah, don't worry about it.
This is perfect for us, because it has all kinds of antiquarian applications, too.
Absolutely.
That's what you can make.
You can say that all of a sudden is a big interest in antiquarian bookshops.
Books about Franz Joseph and his time are back.
Why don't you jot some of these things down for me?
That's what I will do.
And you can fax them to me or mail them to me or whatever?
Well, the reason is that there is a new book which made such an interest that Stanley Marcus in his column in the Dallas News wrote about it.
And blah, blah, blah.
And that's the book and that's the angle.
I'll do it, okay?
For Biblio, and it'll be... She'll do it.
I'll just say I'm going to write the story.
And it won't be as part of my column.
It'll be like a book review.
Now, as far as your two books, what are the... One book is on libraries in Europe?
Well, it's more than that, but that's going to be a chapter in the book.
Okay, so what will be the whole book?
The whole book is going to be about book culture...
You know, books of the future.
It's not going to be just about collecting, although there will be chapters on collectors.
You know, I'm very, very interested in... How well do you know Jim Dunley?
I don't know him.
Jim Dunley is a publisher who is not a publisher.
He is a printer.
There in Chicago?
No, on four continents.
He prints in 22 countries.
Wow.
And he's a friend of mine.
And aren't they based in Chicago, though?
Sure.
Doesn't he have a daughter who's a member of the Caxton Club?
Jim and his wife are both members.
There was a young woman there, and I think she's the fourth generation Donnelly.
Yes.
That's probably his daughter.
And she was kind of a pretty woman, and she was there, and she introduced herself to me, as I recall.
Well, Jim Dundee is a good friend of mine since 20-some years.
Well, I'd be pleased to... I'm looking for any ideas.
I'm really looking for thoughts.
I told you I'm planning to do something on Sarajevo.
Yes.
That's going to be a terrific chapter, you know, because when we talk about the course that the future can take... It makes...
Hitler's book burning chicken shit.
Exactly.
And it makes Stalin's book burning chicken shit.
And you know what?
This story hasn't been told in the United States.
That's right.
It's like it was not told that Mao destroyed all the books in the main library in Peking.
I was there on the ruins and they wouldn't let me make a picture.
Really?
Sure.
That trash was three floors high.
Wow.
Three floors high.
Huh.
Yeah.
Now, you sent me a beautiful book on Hungary, which I have, which will be a reference for this.
Can you think of any really notable other European collections, libraries in particular that have been so critical in the preservation of knowledge and history and culture?
Certainly.
And I can send you to book dealers whose grandfather sold books to me.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, yeah.
I can introduce you to people like the Nebuchadnezzar, like the Hercs, like the Rappaport in Rome and in Vienna and in London, you know?
And that gives you another angle.
to write on this type of book trade.
You know, I'm also going to have a chapter on, you know Barney Rosenthal?
I know the name, certainly.
Barney, he's a Berkeley, California bookseller?
Yes.
He did a lecture at Columbia University on the emigre booksellers who were forced out of Germany by Hitler.
And from Austria by the same guy.
Exactly.
I'm going to do a chapter on them.
I'm going to interview as many of these living booksellers as I can find.
Unfortunately, Michael Trent already died.
And who was that?
He was a bookseller who had his principal story in Vienna, but he also had a book in Budapest, a story in Budapest.
And what was his name?
His name was, I just want to tell you the name.
I know it's his childhood.
He died in New York, you know, I think.
I bought books from him here in this country.
His name will come up.
Yeah.
I will...
I will call her back in three, four minutes.
I don't want to interrupt.
So anyway, you're talking about a bookseller?
Yeah, yeah.
And his name will come up.
Okay.
When you think of it, jot it down.
I will.
I will have here an envelope for this.
Okay.
And really jot down your thoughts on the Katarina book.
Yeah, sure.
And as soon as we finish this phone call, I'm going to call Amy in Oregon and tell her I'm doing a review of this book for her.
Yeah.
I'm not going to ask her.
I'm going to tell her.
Yeah, yeah.
Don't you think?
Maybe what I'll do actually is I'll pick, there are three or four wonderful books, new books with antiquarian implications.
Yes.
And I could make like a little roundup for her.
That's terrific.
And that way, you know, this is one of several because there are some wonderful, wonderful brand new books.
Yeah.
Delightful.
And of course your book is quite reasonably priced.
Your book might be the bargain of the whole lot.
You know what I'm saying?
I'm sure it will be.
And maybe that would be the angle there, one of the lines there, too.
I'll do something.
You can count on me.
Now, the next book, I'm going out.
I had a wonderful interview last week with Paul LeClaire, who's the president of the New York Public Library.
And when I went into his office, he had two copies of A Gentle Madness there.
And he said, would you inscribe these, please?
I said, certainly.
One is for Bill Blass, who gave the library $10 million, and the other was for Brooke Astor.
And he said, gee, you should talk to Brooke Astor.
I said, well, I don't know if she'd talk to me.
He says, I will arrange it for you.
So we're getting there, huh?
It's picking up a little bit.
And I think this book's going to be every bit as good as A Gentle Madness may be better.
I'm really excited about it.
And you know, the other thing, I think that for Biblio, you should start to think on something that is very important.
Non-books in libraries.
Non-books?
Yes.
Meaning what?
Meaning that libraries are sending back fantastic things to donors.
that this is not in book format.
This is not a book, and we collect books.
Well, what do you mean they're sending back things?
Okay, I gave about 15,000 items to the University of Chicago, Ray Huston Library.
The man with whom I made the deal died.
He dropped dead on a railroad station in England on vacation.
And a new group took over the library.
And they sent back to me about a thousand items from my collection.
Breathtaking things.
Things were the only copy I had in my library.
Because they say that's not a book.
Because it's only fifteen pages, sixteen pages.
Because it has no Library of Congress number.
They sound like pretty stupid people.
more and more computer-oriented stupid people are in the libraries, and you are the only person to whom they would listen.
Well, I'm going to write a whole chapter on that, you know.
Yeah.
When I go out to California for the ILAB next month, are you going out?
You know, the International League of Antiquarium Booksellers?
Exactly.
And then from there, I'm going up to Seattle to Corbis, which is this whole...
unit of Microsoft, which is putting books on CD-ROMs.
And I'm doing the whole exploration of what shape libraries and books are taking in the future.
And I'm doing a major job of it.
I mean, I'm talking to all the important people, including a Nobel laureate at the Rockefeller University.
You know I won the Nobel Prize.
You did?
First, I won it from a Ukrainian.
physician on the ship, you know, and I won his Nobel Prize.
Did you really?
Yeah, but then he won it back.
The second time, I won the Nobel Prize.
You know why?
Why?
Because I wore my chef's pants for one year without a belt.
It was called the no belt.
For fat people who could wear their hair for one year.
That's funny.
That's really cute.
Yeah, but don't write about this.
No, no, no, no, no.
I will give you book stories.
Well, I want stories for the second book on book collecting.
I'm going to do a... I promise you I will send you to Melk.
Okay.
Melk is a monastery.
near to Vienna, a very quiet, unassuming place.
You know?
And you will hear fantastic stories, and you will see mind-blowing books.
Now, what is the significance of this monastic library?
Is there a historical significance to it?
Historic significance?
That this is one of the last medieval monastic libraries in the same hands of the same order.
Oh, I have to go there then.
You will have to go there.
Because I'm going to Patmos in the Aegean, where there's a 900-year-old Greek monastic library.
That's right.
Uninterrupted.
The Turks didn't stop them.
Nobody stopped them.
They're still there.
Yes.
Now this is also such a library.
Melk, M-E-L-K, right?
Melk, M-E-L-K.
Right.
Yeah.
Oh, this is good, Louis.
You're doing your job here.
I will arrange for somebody who will drive you to Melk and Meg.
You will?
Yes.
Sure.
You know, I'm going to call my travel agent.
I'm going to go ahead and see if I can make arrangements now for that Chicago trip.
Yeah.
And I will get you some.
You see, we should not concentrate only on that.
this kind of old things.
Oh, no, no.
We're going to do books of the future, too.
Don't you understand?
I'm going to have two chapters here, both called Continuum.
Continuum 1 is the first chapter.
Continuum 2 is the final chapter.
And then there are going to be about six very exciting chapters in between, one of which will be these emigre booksellers.
Another one is going to be about creative
writers, artists, and their thoughts about, I'm going to do about literary librarians like Gerta, like Borges, men who were great creative artists, but who also were librarians in their lifetime.
Did you know that?
And I will also get you together with a publisher within his 90s who is publishing miniature books.
In the U.S.?
In the U.S.
Hmm.
His name is Stanley Marcus.
Huh?
He has a non-asuch press.
That's his press?
Non-asuch.
Yeah, that's a famous press.
Yes.
That's his press.
Isn't he out of Texas?
Yeah.
Isn't he the Neiman Marcus fellow?
Stanley Marcus.
Yeah.
I'd love to talk to him.
I just had lunch with him a few weeks ago.
And I know him since ages.
Didn't he go to Harvard?
I think he got to Harvard.
Yeah, he was one of George Parker Winship's students at Harvard, one of Winship's students.
Yeah.
Well, this is coming together, will we?
Sure.
Now, should I contact Ralph Newman and this other fellow?
Would you think it would be better for you to do that?
Let me contact the other fellow and let me explore the situation with Ralph Newman.
Ralph Newman has a third wife.
Okay.
Who is a very strange lady.
Very strange lady.
But I'm really interested in his reminiscences and I'll put him in this new book.
That's what I would like to do.
I think it would really be a grave mistake if you missed this opportunity.
Let me handle it my way and then I get back to you.
I have a fellow I'm going to see in L.A.
next month, Lloyd Coatsen, who owns the Neutrogena Company.
And he's a major, major collector of children's books.
He had an opportunity to be in A Gentle Madness, and he turned it down.
And he came up to me at the LA Fair, and he said, all my friends cannot believe I could have been in this book, and I refused.
He said, I'll do anything to get it to the next one.
And he's turning all of his books over, children's books, to Princeton.
And he also wants to set up something where children can be involved.
Not students, you know, like college students, but young children.
And this is a tribute to his young son who was murdered about 15 years ago.
It's a great story.
So I'm going to have that in the next book.
And then that'll also be a chapter on literacy, you see.
So I'm going to do literacy.
I'm going to do dumbing down.
I'm going to do this whole thing about
uh this this thing about canonization how books enter the literary canon and when you go to Sarajevo we will try to get you to make a side trip to a very different type of a library who was a man was a literary figure in Transylvania and